doc/user_guide.rst, before:

:orphan:

==========
User guide
==========


================
CircHiC tutorial
================

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :local:
   :depth: 1

Introduction
============

CircHiC is a plotting library developped for bacterial HiC data. It is built
upon Matplotlib, the single most used Python package for 2D-graphics.

This tutorial is heavily inspired by the excellent `Matplotlib tutorial
<https://github.com/rougier/matplotlib-tutorial>`_ written by Nicolas Rougier.


A simple CircHic plot
=====================

In this section, we are going to plot data from *E. coli* from `Lioy et al.
(2018) Cell, 172(4), 771–783 <http://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.12.027>`_.
The data is provided as a sample dataset of :mod:`circhic`. We will start with the
default setting and enrich the figure step by step to make it nicer and
supplement the HiC contact map with genomic information.

The first step is to load the data and the modules we will be using:

::
  
  import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
  import circhic

  data = circhic.datasets.load_ecoli()
  counts = data["counts"]
  nbins = data["nbins"]

Several datasets are included in :mod:`circhic`, including contact maps from *E.
coli*, *B. subtilis*, a chromosome from the Human cell line KBM7, etc. All of
those datasets are accessible from the module :mod:`circhic.datasets`.

``counts`` is a NumPy ndarray of shape ``(469, 469)``.

Before attempting any visualization, we will normalize the data using :mod:`iced`.

::

  from iced.normalization import ICE_normalization
  counts = ICE_normalization(counts)

Using the defaults
------------------

:mod:`circhic` comes with a set of default settings that are built upons
Matplotlib. These settings allow to customize almost any kind of properties:
figure size and dpi, line width, color and style, axes, axis and grid
properties, text and font properties and so on. While matplotlib defaults are
rather good in most cases, you may want to modify some properties for specific
cases.

:mod:`circhic` also requires to know more about the data plotted than
Matplotlib. In particular, the library requires to know the number of bins of
the HiC contact map. Let us instantiate a :mod:`circhic` figure by providing
the number of bins per chromosomes to the figure. You can also provide the
exact length in base pair.

.. plot:: scripts/simple_plot.py

.. include:: scripts/simple_plot.py
  :code: python
  :start-line: 4

Changing colormap and border width
----------------------------------

In the script below, we have changed the default colormap used as well as the
border thickness.

.. plot:: scripts/simple_plot_colormap.py

.. include:: scripts/simple_plot_colormap.py
  :code: python
  :start-line: 5


Adding a colorbar
-----------------

We are now going to add a colorbar to the plot. In order to do this, we need
to retrieve the ``mappable``, ie the image, that sets the range of values. The
colorbar can either be ``horizontal`` or ``vertical`` (the default).

.. plot:: scripts/simple_plot_colorbar.py

.. include:: scripts/simple_plot_colorbar.py
  :code: python
  :start-line: 5

.. topic:: Working with Matplotlib colorbar

   Experienced Matplotlib users can recognized that the object returned by the
   :meth:`CircHiCFig.set_colorbar` function is a Matplotlib colorbar. As such,
   one can use any Matplotlib strategy to change the ticks, ticklabels, and
   labels of the colorbar.


Changing the range of the colormap
----------------------------------

We are now going to set the minimal and maximum value of the colorbar, in
order to highlight the patterns of the contact map.

.. plot:: scripts/simple_plot_range_val.py

.. include:: scripts/simple_plot_range_val.py
  :code: python
  :start-line: 5


Setting the range of genomic distances plotted
----------------------------------------------

In this figure, we would like to highlight two elements: (1) the chromosomal
interaction domains (CID) (closely related to the topological associated
domains in mammifers); (2) the second diagonal highlighting the enriched
interactions between the two arms of the chromosome. We are thus going to
adjust the range of the genomic distance plotted. To highlight the chromosomal
interaction domains, we will plot only the contact counts close to the
diagonal. To highlight the second diagonal, we will plot the whole range of
contact count data. To facilitate readability, we will also set the inner
radius to a non-zero value, in order to create a "donut" shape.

.. plot:: scripts/simple_plot_gdis.py

::

  inner_gdis = 2000000
  outer_gdis = 600000
  inner_radius = 0.005

  im, ax = circhicfig.plot_hic(counts, cmap="bone_r", border_thickness=0.01,
                               vmin=vmin, vmax=vmax, inner_radius=inner_radius,
                               inner_gdis=inner_gdis, outer_gdis=outer_gdis)


Adding ticks and tick labels
----------------------------

Now that the contact map displays the two features we are interested in, it is
time to add ticks and tick labels to the plot.

.. plot:: scripts/simple_plot_ticks.py

Commit message:

DOC small fixes here and there in the documentation

doc/user_guide.rst, after:

:orphan:

==========
User guide
==========


================
CircHiC tutorial
================

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :local:
   :depth: 2

Introduction
============

CircHiC is a plotting library developped for bacterial HiC data. It is built
upon Matplotlib, the single most used Python package for 2D-graphics.

This tutorial is heavily inspired by the excellent `Matplotlib tutorial
<https://github.com/rougier/matplotlib-tutorial>`_ written by Nicolas Rougier.


A simple CircHic plot
=====================

In this section, we are going to plot data from *E. coli* from `Lioy et al.
(2018) Cell, 172(4), 771–783 <http://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.12.027>`_.
The data is provided as a sample dataset of :mod:`circhic`. We will start with the
default setting and enrich the figure step by step to make it nicer and
supplement the HiC contact map with genomic information.

The first step is to load the data and the modules we will be using:

::
  
  import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
  import circhic

  data = circhic.datasets.load_ecoli()
  counts = data["counts"]
  nbins = data["nbins"]

Several datasets are included in :mod:`circhic`, including contact maps from *E.
coli*, *B. subtilis*, a chromosome from the Human cell line KBM7, etc. All of
those datasets are accessible from the module :mod:`circhic.datasets`.

``counts`` is a NumPy ndarray of shape ``(469, 469)``.

Before attempting any visualization, we will normalize the data using :mod:`iced`.

::

  from iced.normalization import ICE_normalization
  counts = ICE_normalization(counts)

Using the defaults
------------------

:mod:`circhic` comes with a set of default settings that are built upons
Matplotlib. These settings allow to customize almost any kind of properties:
figure size and dpi, line width, color and style, axes, axis and grid
properties, text and font properties and so on. While matplotlib defaults are
rather good in most cases, you may want to modify some properties for specific
cases.

:mod:`circhic` also requires to know more about the data plotted than
Matplotlib. In particular, the library requires to know the number of bins of
the HiC contact map. Let us instantiate a :mod:`circhic` figure by providing
the number of bins per chromosomes to the figure. You can also provide the
exact length in base pair.

.. plot:: scripts/simple_plot.py

.. include:: scripts/simple_plot.py
  :code: python
  :start-line: 4

Changing colormap and border width
----------------------------------

In the script below, we have changed the default colormap used as well as the
border thickness.

.. plot:: scripts/simple_plot_colormap.py

.. include:: scripts/simple_plot_colormap.py
  :code: python
  :start-line: 5


Adding a colorbar
-----------------

We are now going to add a colorbar to the plot. In order to do this, we need
to retrieve the ``mappable``, ie the image, that sets the range of values. The
colorbar can either be ``horizontal`` or ``vertical`` (the default).

.. plot:: scripts/simple_plot_colorbar.py

.. include:: scripts/simple_plot_colorbar.py
  :code: python
  :start-line: 5

.. topic:: Working with Matplotlib colorbar

   Experienced Matplotlib users can recognized that the object returned by the
   :meth:`CircHiCFig.set_colorbar` function is a Matplotlib colorbar. As such,
   one can use any Matplotlib strategy to change the ticks, ticklabels, and
   labels of the colorbar.


Changing the range of the colormap
----------------------------------

We are now going to set the minimal and maximum value of the colorbar, in
order to highlight the patterns of the contact map.

.. plot:: scripts/simple_plot_range_val.py

.. include:: scripts/simple_plot_range_val.py
  :code: python
  :start-line: 5


Setting the range of genomic distances plotted
----------------------------------------------

In this figure, we would like to highlight two elements: (1) the chromosomal
interaction domains (CID) (closely related to the topological associated
domains in mammifers); (2) the second diagonal highlighting the enriched
interactions between the two arms of the chromosome. We are thus going to
adjust the range of the genomic distance plotted. To highlight the chromosomal
interaction domains, we will plot only the contact counts close to the
diagonal. To highlight the second diagonal, we will plot the whole range of
contact count data. To facilitate readability, we will also set the inner
radius to a non-zero value, in order to create a "donut" shape.

.. plot:: scripts/simple_plot_gdis.py

::

  inner_gdis = 200
  outer_gdis = 60
  inner_radius = 0.01

  im, ax = circhicfig.plot_hic(counts, cmap="bone_r", border_thickness=0.01,
                               vmin=vmin, vmax=vmax, inner_radius=inner_radius,
                               inner_gdis=inner_gdis, outer_gdis=outer_gdis)


Adding ticks and tick labels
----------------------------

Now that the contact map displays the two features we are interested in, it is
time to add ticks and tick labels to the plot.

.. plot:: scripts/simple_plot_ticks.py


And here is the entire code to reproduce this plot!

.. include:: scripts/simple_plot_ticks.py
  :code: python
